---
layout: post
category: blog
title: Observations on Romans 3:21-24
author: Floyd Hightower
tags:
    - Thought
    - Sola Fide
    - Faith
    - Reformation
    - Romans
    - New Testament
---

Observations on Romans 3:21-24, particularly as it relates to the reformation doctrine of "Sola Fide".

### Romans 3:21

- "But now" - This implies something new and different from the previous discussion (see Romans 3:19-20) on the Jewish Law.
- "apart from the Law" - The righteousness of God described here is not available via the Jewish Law. This is in direct opposition to Romans 3:20.
- "the righteousness of God" - This is righteousness from God which God imputes or, synonymously, credits to the believer due to no merit of the believer.
- "the righteousness of God has been manifested" - This righteousness which God imputes was revealed.
- "being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets" - Although recently (at the time Paul was writing) revealed, the righteousness of God had been testified of old by both the Law (referring to the Mosaic law) and the prophets.

### Romans 3:22

- "even" - Paul uses this word to drive home the magnitude of what he is saying.
- "even the righteousness of God" - Paul reiterates both the object (righteousness) and the source (God).
- "through faith in Jesus Christ" - Paul now describes the mean by which the righteousness of God is available: faith in Jesus Christ.
- "for all who believe" - This righteousness of God is available through faith to *anyone* who believes.
- "for there is no distinction" - The "distinction" in this verse is a difference between Jew and Gentile (which Paul has been discussing in the book of Romans up to this point).

### Romans 3:23

- "for" - This continues Paul's previous point by describing *why* justification is by faith without distinction.
- "for all have sinned" - There is no distinction between Jew and Gentile in that both are sinners.
- "and fall short of the glory of God" - I believe that this is a reiteration of the last phrase and that the "glory of God" is the glorious holiness of God. I am still, however, researching this to make sure this is an accurate assessment of the verse.

### Romans 3:24

- "being justified" - How can those described in verse 23 have right standing before a holy God? By being justified from outside of themselves! As Paul mentions earlier in this passage, the very righteousness of God is made available.
- "as a gift" - This is not something we have earned (see Paul's continued argument in Romans 4:1-8).
- "by His grace" - Justification is by God's grace.
- "by His grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus" - The means of God's salvific grace is the redemption available in Christ.
- "the redemption which is in Christ Jesus" - It is through Christ's redemption that He pays with His life to buy us back to Himself.
